# ConstructionFileSimulator

This project is for simulating recombinant DNA experiments.  Other algorithms not included here are design algorithms that generate ConstructionFile models describing the individual molecular biology steps such as PCR, digestion, ligation, and assembly reactions. This project has reverse algorithms for simulating ConstructionFile models and predicting their product.

*******
Models:
*******

#### Polynucleotide: An immutable Model encoding the structure of a nucleic acid molecule. 
It is needed to simulate the enzymatic reactions occuring during digestion and ligation. The complex it describes can be DNA or RNA (not used here), single stranded or double stranded, have sticky ends on either side, or can be circular. It contains a toString() method that gives a visual representation of the molecule showing the duplex with its ends:

A linear DNA with BamHI sticky ends on both sides:

<pre>
5'-GATCCtttG    -3'
3'-    GaaaCCTAG-5'
</pre>

There are convenience Constructors for instantiating blunt-ended, linear fragments, and circular fragments.  The above fragment would be described as follows:

<pre>
Polynucleotide poly = new Polynucleotide("CtttG", "GATC", "GATC");
</pre>

The first argument (the "sequence") corresponds to the region of fully duplexed DNA. The second two strings are the 5' and 3' sticky ends.  If the value is "", it is a blunt end.  All sticky ends are represented in the 5' to 3' direction referring to the top strand.  Thus both arguments here are "GATC".  A 3' extension is represented by the symbol "-" such as:

<pre>
Polynucleotide poly = new Polynucleotide("gaaacccGAGGAGaaaaaaaa", "-TGCA", "-CC");

5'-    gaaacccGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCC-3'
3'-ACGTctttgggCTCCTCtttttttt  -5'
</pre>

A circular DNA is indicated by a boolean, and the sticky end fields are ignored in algorithms. They are instantiated with a different convenience constructor requiring the sequence and a boolean. The toString() method illustrates circularity with "..." symbols:

<pre>
Polynucleotide poly = new Polynucleotide("aaaaaaaa", true);

5'...aaaaaaaa...3'
3'...tttttttt...5'
</pre>

*******
Functions:
*******

All Functions contain initiate and run methods, and follow rebuild-the-world conventions. To invoke one, you instantiate and initiate the Function once, and then use this instance for many calls of run. For example:

<pre>
PolyRevComp func = new PolyRevComp();
func.initiate();
for(ini i=0; i<1000000; i++) {
    func.run(...);
}
</pre>

The Functions below are in the org.ucb.c5.construction package.  Initialize them as above, then run them with examples provided.  More examples are present in each class's main method.

#### PolyRevComp: Reverse complement Function for a Polynucleotide
Inputs a Polynucleotide and returns a new Polynucleotide that is 'flipped around'.

<pre>
Demo a PstI/BseRI digested DNA with 3' overhangs

Polynucleotide poly = new Polynucleotide("gaaacccGAGGAGaaaaaaaa", "-TGCA", "-CC");
Polynucleotide rc = func.run(poly);
            
5'-    gaaacccGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCC-3'
3'-ACGTctttgggCTCCTCtttttttt  -5'

Reverse complemented result:

5'-  ttttttttCTCCTCgggtttcTGCA-3'
3'-CCaaaaaaaaGAGGAGcccaaag    -5'
</pre>

#### DigestSimulator:  Simulates digestion to completion
Inputs a single Polynucleotide and a List of restriction enzymes, and returns a list of Polynucleotides representing the full digestion products by all the enzymes.  The enzymes are provided as RestrictionEnzyme objects encoding cutting details.  These restriction enzyme Models can be generated by another Function, RestrictionEnzymeFactory, which hard-codes several commonly used enzymes. Running DigestSimulator will linearize circular DNAs and cut linear DNAs into multiple fragments. The runnable demo below is from demo package class DemoDigAndLig illustrating digestion of a circular DNA and then re-ligation of the products.

<pre>
Demo digestion of a circular DNA with BamHI and BseRI

//Initialize the functions
RestrictionEnzymeFactory factory = new RestrictionEnzymeFactory();
factory.initiate();
DigestSimulator dig = new DigestSimulator();
dig.initiate();

//Construct the polynucleotide and restriction enzymes
Polynucleotide poly = new Polynucleotide("atatatatGGATCCacacacacacGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCCagagagagag", true);
List enz = new ArrayList<>();
enz.add(factory.run(Enzyme.BseRI));
enz.add(factory.run(Enzyme.BamHI));
    
//Run the DigestSimulator Function
List<Polynucleotide> digfrags = dig.run(poly, enz);

Starting plasmid:
5'...atatatatGGATCCacacacacacGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCCagagagagag...3'
3'...tatatataCCTAGGtgtgtgtgtgCTCCTCttttttttGGtctctctctc...5'

Digestion fragments:
5'-  agagagagagatatatatG    -3'
3'-GGtctctctctctatatataCCTAG-5'

5'-GATCCacacacacacGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCC-3'
3'-    GtgtgtgtgtgCTCCTCtttttttt  -5'
</pre>

#### LigateSimulator:  Simulates ligation to completion
Inputs a List of Polynucleotide representing the DNA fragments, and returns a single Polynucleotide.  It will throw an Exception if the sequences do not assemble into a single product.  It will also circularize a DNA able to do so.  Here is the second portion of DemoDigAndLig, where the digestion fragments generated with DigestSimulator (digfrags) are reassembled with LigateSimulator:

<pre>
LigateSimulator lig = new LigateSimulator();
lig.initiate();
Polynucleotide pdt = lig.run(digfrags);

Re-ligated product:
5'...agagagagagatatatatGGATCCacacacacacGAGGAGaaaaaaaaCC...3'
3'...tctctctctctatatataCCTAGGtgtgtgtgtgCTCCTCttttttttGG...5'
</pre>

*******
History:
*******

The Polynucleotide code was begun from 20n project C4, and minimally altered to enable extraction from the larger codebase.  The direct copy-over is in the first commit.  The original code was not complete and had many errors.  It was also not in rebuild-the-world style of Functions and Models.
It also has no tests.

2019_03_23
The code was reworked, and is now functional on all examples considered for ligation and digestion, which is complete (until we find out it's not).
